Hi and welcome back.
In this video we're going to talk about
processes and threads.
Processes and threads are getting into
more and more complicated topics in computer science
so please use the course Q&A and also
do your own research to find other ways
of explaining things if anything's unclear.
Processes and threads are two essential parts
of how your computer operates and all computers
have processes and threads.
Your computer has a number of cores inside it.
A core is just a unit inside a computer
that can perform some mathematical operations.
Your computer has a processor, a CPU,
like for example an Intel i7 or an i5,
or an Intel Pentium, or an AMD.
These CPU's, these processors, have inside them
a number of cores and each core is
reasonably independent although they can communicate
with one another.
Each core I mentioned earlier is a unit
that can perform mathematical operations,
and, by the way, that's all computers do
is perform mathematical operations
and then when you have enough of them
they can do things like print things out
to the screen and, you know, display graphics and so forth.
So each core can be responsible for
essentially running one thing.
So going back to our philosopher example
you could have one philosopher on each core.
So each core is essentially running one philosopher,
which going to our previous analogy is that
one philosopher has the resources it needs in order to eat.
So here you'd have four philosophers,
each with two forks, eating because they've got
the forks necessary to eat.
Okay.
Now, of course, again in our previous analogy
we also had a number of waiting philosophers
that were waiting to eat.
And in computing these would be waiting threads.
These are threads, or things we want to do,
that don't have the resources to run yet.
In this case, these would be philosophers waiting
for their forks, their resources, to become available.
Okay.
So a thread
in computing, moving away from philosophers,
a thread in computing is a line of code execution.
For example, your Python programme can run in a single thread.
Or a game can run in a single thread.
You know, anything can run in a single thread
it's just the code in an application
that runs from top to bottom.
That can run in a thread
and you can have one thread running
in one core at a time.
So if you have four cores you can run
four threads at the same time, one in each core.
Okay.
Now the other word inside this presentation
that we wanted to look at is the word process.
A process is not something that runs.
Okay?
What runs on the cores are the threads,
but a processes is sort of a wrapper around it.
So a process contains at least one thread,
it can be more, plus some resources
set aside by your computer, your operating system.
So for example, normally the process will contain one thread
plus the core that the thread is running on,
and potentially some other resources
that it has reserved like a network connection,
or a hard drive, some file pointers,
or anything else.
And, of course, these resources continuously change
as the process' needs change.
For example, the process can reserve the network
for a few seconds and then release it,
let go of it, so another process can have it.
Similarly, a process can reserve a core
to run a thread on it for a period of time
and then release it so another process can have it.
Okay, so the thread is the thing that runs
and the process is what manages all the resources
that it needs in order to run.
So this is gonna be important in just a moment.
Let's go back and have our cores here, each running a task,
and we have our waiting threads, which are waiting to run.
Two of the threads in the cores
could be part of the same process.
Okay?
So here we would have the process
being the two cores plus the two threads,
plus any other resources that those threads need
like a network or whatever else.
Similarly, you could have other processes with also
some threads running and having their own resources.
In this case, process two has a resource, which is a core,
and it's running a thread.
Process three also has a resource
which is a core and is running a thread.
The waiting threads could be a part
of one of these processes and they just
happen to be waiting.
Or they could be part of other processes
which at the moment don't have any resources.
Okay, so the process is just the wrapper
around the threads and the resources they need.
Going back to our philosopher example,
where we have here our five philosophers,
we could have in an imaginary scenario
a computer that has five cores
and our philosopher each needs two resources to run
so we could say that they need two of the cores
in order to run.
So going back to the example,
here we would have, again, two philosophers running.
Each consuming two resources
and one resource left over that cannot be used
because we don't have anything that can run
on a single resource.
In computers this is normally not the case.
Nearly everything can run in a single core,
but some things benefit from running in multiple cores.
Okay?
So in computing we have
the cores and each one can run a thread.
So lets move away from the philosopher
analogy, it starts to break down shortly after this.
So when you have your two cores each running a thread,
the thread is represented here by a T by the way,
then all is good.
These two threads can run forever.
So if you just have these two threads
and you just have two cores
you can run the two threads forever.
They never need to stop running and that's fine.
An example could be one of these threads is controlling
what gets displayed to your monitor, your screen,
and another controls the cursor, your mouse,
that gets displayed on your screen
and the fact that it can move around and so forth.
So if you have these two threads
you can see your mouse moving when you move it
and you can see things in your monitor
and that's good.
They will run forever.
And, of course, these two threads could belong
to one process or it could belong
to two processes separately.
Okay?
But not to three because each process
has to contain at least one thread.
Now if we add in waiting threads,
which there will always be some in your computer.
For example, something to deal with
you typing in your keyboard.
Now you have to decide if you want to run the two threads
that are currently in the cores continuously
so that you can see things on your screen
and you can move your mouse,
then your keyboard is never gonna respond
because a thread that deals with your keyboard
is waiting and is never going to run.
So you have to start doing time slicing
otherwise the waiting threads are going to starve
and we don't want that.
Okay.
So time slicing, moving one thread
out of a core and putting another one in.
This is not free, by the way.
It requires some resources by your computer
in order to do that because the operating system
has to save the current status of the thread.
Remember, a thread is just a line of code that's running
so you have to save where the code currently is
so that when you bring it back into the core
after it's gone through the queue it doesn't have to start
from the beginning of that code.
It starts from where it left off,
and this is not free.
The operating system has to, sort of,
save the status, pull it out of the core,
bring another one in, and then when that's finished
remove that from the core,
bring your old one in, reset the status
back to what it was before and continue running.
So it's not completely free.
There's some communication, there's some overhead
in changing from one thread to another.
But this is time slicing and this is essentially
the foundations of processes and threads
and also on how your computer operates.
Over the next section I'm really excited to guide you
through how this works in Python.
So let's move over on to the next video
where we're gonna talk a bit more about that.
I'll see you there.